docs: fix outdated descriptions of `-output-filename` (#11032)
open-mpi/ompi: docs/man-openmpi/man1/mpirun.1.rst

To manage standard I/O:

* ``--output-filename <filename>``: Redirect output from application
  processes into ``{filename}.prterun-{hostname}-{pid}@{jobid}.{rank}.(out|err|diag)``,
  where ``{hostname}`` is the hostname, ``{pid}`` is the process ID of
  ``mpirun``, ``{jobid}`` is the local job ID, and ``{rank}`` is the
  processes' rank in ``MPI_COMM_WORLD``, left-filled with zero's for
  correct ordering in file listings. A file is not created if the
  corresponding stream is empty. Any intermediate directories in the
  resulting output files will automatically be created if necessary. If
  ``filename`` is a relative path, it will be converted to an absolute
  path based on the directory where :ref:`mpirun(1) <man1-mpirun>` is

>   executed. Note that this will not work in environments where the file

Reviewer: I don't believe this is true, or at least maybe I don't understand what you mean. The output file is created on the node where mpirun is being executed. If filename is a relative path, it will therefore be placed relative to the working directory of mpirun _on the node where mpirun is executing_. Not sure I understand what your last sentence in the entry has to do with it - i.e., why this would care about the file system on the compute nodes?

Author: https://github.com/open-mpi/ompi/blob/41960bcee361b1121c420bd4a99e2888ac89f5dc/docs/man-openmpi/man1/mpirun.1.rst#current-working-directory

> If the `-wdir` option is not specified, Open MPI will send the directory name where `mpirun` was invoked to each of the remote nodes. The remote nodes will try to change to that directory. If they are unable (e.g., if the directory does not exist on that node), then Open MPI will use the default directory determined by the starter.

Relative path to the output files seem to be the directory where `mpirun` is invoked and `-wdir` has no effect:

```console
$ mpirun --version
mpirun (Open MPI) 5.0.9

Report bugs to https://www.open-mpi.org/community/help/

$ cd /tmp
$ rm -f foo.prte-*@1.[01].out
$ mpirun -n 2 --output-filename=foo --host localhost:2 --wdir / pwd
/
/
$ cat /tmp/foo.prte-*@1.[01].out
/
/
```

To manage standard I/O:

* ``--output-filename <filename>``: Redirect output from application processes

>   into `{filename}/{job}/rank.{rank}/std[out,err,diag]`, where `{rank}` is the
>   processes' rank in MPI_COMM_WORLD, left-filled with zero's for correct
>   ordering in listings. Any directories in the filename will automatically be
>   created. A relative path value will be converted to an absolute path based on
>   the cwd where mpirun is executed. Note that this will not work on
>   environments where the file system on compute nodes differs from that where
>   :ref:`mpirun(1) <man1-mpirun>` is executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  into ``{filename}/{job}/rank.{rank}/std[out,err,diag]``, where ``{rank}`` is the
  processes' rank in ``MPI_COMM_WORLD``, left-filled with zero's for correct
  ordering in file listings. Any intermediate directories in the resulting output files will automatically be
  created. If ``filename`` is a relative path, it will be converted to an absolute path based on
  the diretory where :ref:`mpirun(1) <man1-mpirun>` is executed. Note that this will not work in
  environments where the file system on compute nodes differs from that where
  :ref:`mpirun(1) <man1-mpirun>` is executed.
```

Reviewer 2: Is the comment "will not work" accurate?  In an environment where `<mpirun cwd>` does not exist on the remote nodes, doesn't the filename/directory hierarchy get created relative to `$HOME` on the remote nodes?

Author: > In an environment where `<mpirun cwd>` does not exist on the remote nodes, doesn't the filename/directory hierarchy get created relative to `$HOME` on the remote nodes?

I tried on a cluster, and the hierarchy is created *relative to the current working directory*:

```console
$ ompi_info --version
Open MPI v4.1.1

http://www.open-mpi.org/community/help/
$ mpirun -map-by ppr:1:node rm -rf /tmp/foo  # make sure the directory does not exist
$ mkdir /tmp/foo  # /tmp is not shared among the nodes
$ cd /tmp/foo
$ mpirun -map-by ppr:1:node hostname
node1
node2
$ mpirun -map-by ppr:1:node pwd
/tmp/foo
/home/me
```

At this point, the directory is not created; it is created when `mpirun` with `-output-filename` is finished:

```console
$ mpirun -map-by ppr:1:node -output-filename bar pwd
/tmp/foo
/home/me
$ mpirun -map-by ppr:1:node pwd
/tmp/foo
/tmp/foo
$ mpirun -map-by ppr:1:node find $PWD
/tmp/foo
/tmp/foo/bar
/tmp/foo/bar/1
/tmp/foo/bar/1/rank.0
/tmp/foo/bar/1/rank.0/stdout
/tmp/foo/bar/1/rank.0/stderr
/tmp/foo
/tmp/foo/bar
/tmp/foo/bar/1
/tmp/foo/bar/1/rank.1
/tmp/foo/bar/1/rank.1/stdout
/tmp/foo/bar/1/rank.1/stderr
$ mpirun -map-by ppr:1:node find $PWD -type f -name stdout -exec cat {} +
/tmp/foo
/home/me
```

Author: I’m not sure if `mpirun` always behaves like this, though.

Author: > it is created when `mpirun` with `-output-filename` is finished

Wrong: the directory is created when `mpirun` is invoked.

Reviewer: For OMPI v5, neither statement is actually correct, if you want to get precise. The directory is locally created by mpirun on each node upon first output by a local application process on an affected channel (i.e., stdout if stdout is being save, stderr if stderr is being saved). If nothing is output, you won't see the directory - but that would be a very unusual app and so is highly unlike for a user to encounter.

Reviewer 2: @rhc54 Gotcha.

@e-kwsm Keep in mind that the docs on `main` are effectively the docs for v5.0 -- these are not the docs for v4.1.x (the ReadTheDocs / Sphinx docs are new for main / v5.0.x and were not back-ported to v4.1.x or earlier).  Hence, for `main:docs/`, we want to document what is happening in the main / v5.0.x `mpirun`.

My question about the `<mpirun cwd>` comment was specifically asking about the case where the CWD of `mpirun` does not exist on a node.  In that case, I have a dim recollection that the output tree for that node will be created in `$HOME` (since the CWD of `mpirun` does not exist n that node).  Is that no longer the case?

Reviewer: That remains the case. Assuming you don't give us an absolute path (which you can do - the directory then must exist everywhere), then the path is relative to the local PRRTE daemon. `mpirun` will use its CWD, and the default CWD of a remote daemon (if the CWD of `mpirun` doesn't exist there) will be `$HOME` of the user.

Reviewer 2: @rhc54 Thanks!

@e-kwsm Can you update the docs to reflect what Ralph just stated, above?

Author: I built 8113e7ce5aa8ab69a720501508a2991cd5dc8bd9 by myself, and found that the pattern is changed:
```console
$ ompi_info --version
Open MPI v5.1.0a1

https://www.open-mpi.org/community/help/
$ mpirun --output-filename foo -n 2 sh -c 'echo $$' : -n 2 sh -c 'hostname >&2'
334108
334109
localhost
localhost
$ ls foo.*
foo.prterun-localhost-334102@1.0.out
foo.prterun-localhost-334102@1.1.out
foo.prterun-localhost-334102@1.2.err
foo.prterun-localhost-334102@1.3.err
```

A filename seems to be `{arg}.prterun-{hostname}-{PID of mpirun}@1.{rank}.(out|err)`.

Reviewer: Yes, that is correct - we tag it to avoid collisions with other mpirun instances that were given the same output-filename option and for shared filesystems. Just one clarification for cases where the application calls MPI_Comm_spawn - the "@1" represents the local jobid of the application. So if the app called spawn, there would be another set of files with an "@2" for the new spawned job. Continued for every spawn.

To manage standard I/O:

* ``--output-filename <filename>``: Redirect output from application processes
  into ``{filename}.prterun-{hostname}-{pid}@{jobid}.{rank}.(out|err|diag)``,
  where ``{hostname}`` is the hostname, ``{pid}`` is the process ID of
  ``mpirun``, ``{jobid}`` is the local job ID, and ``{rank}`` is the processes'
  rank in ``MPI_COMM_WORLD``, left-filled with zero's for correct ordering in
  file listings. A file is not created if the corresponding stream is empty.
  Any intermediate directories in the resulting output files will automatically
  be created if necessary. If ``filename`` is a relative path, it will be
  converted to an absolute path based on the directory where :ref:`mpirun(1)
  <man1-mpirun>` is executed. Note that this will not work in environments
  where the file system on compute nodes differs from that where

>   :ref:`mpirun(1) <man1-mpirun>` is executed.

Reviewer 2: I thought that, per the discussion on the PR, that the resulting files will be created, but they may end up elsewhere...?
